orse«„, 

TwoGoats 



Written by R K Narayan under his eallectidn at "^Mal^udi Days" 

•C'CeHTigtH ft H Ni^rdiiiVn 





AHorseAnd 


TwoGoats 

Written by R K Narayan under his collection of “Malgudi Days” 
©copyright R K Narayan 



A HORSE AND TWO GOATS 


Of the seven hundred villages dotting the map of India, in which the majority of 
India's five hundred million live, flourish and die, Kritam was probably the 
tiniest, indicated on the district survey map by a microscopic dot, the map being 
meant more for the revenue official out to collect tax than for the guidance of the 
motorist, who in any case could not hope to reach it since it sprawled far from 
the highway at the end of a rough track furrowed up by the iron-hooped wheels 
of bullock carts. But its size did not prevent its giving itself the grandiose name 
Kritam, which meant in Tamil “coronet” or crown on the brow of the 
subcontinent. The village consisted of fewer that thirty houses, only one of them 
built from brick and cement. Painted a brilliant yellow and blue all over with 
gorgeous carvings of gods and gargoyles on its balustrade, it was known as the 
Big House. The other houses, distributed in four streets, were generally of 
bamboo thatch, straw, mud and other unspecified material. Muni's was the last 
house in the fourth street, beyond which stretched the fields. In his prosperous 
days Muni had owned a flock of sheep and goats and sallied forth every morning 
driving the flock to the highway a couple of miles away. There he would sit on a 
pedestal of a clay statue of a horse while his cattle grazed around. He carried a 
crook at the end of a bamboo pole and snapped foliage from the avenue trees to 
feed his flock; he also gathered faggots and dry sticks, bundled them, and carried 
them gathered for duel at sunset. 

His wife lit the domestic fire at dawn, boiled water in a mud pot, threw into it a 
handful of miller flour, added salt, and gave him his first nourishment for the 
day. When he started out, she would put in his hand a packed lunch, once again 
the same millet cooked into a little ball, which he could swallow with a raw 
onion at midday. She was old, but he was older and needed all the attention she 
could give him in order to be kept alive. 

His fortunes had declined gradually, unnoticed. From a flock of forty which he 
drove into a pen at night, his stock had now come down to two goats, which 
were not worth the rent of a half rupee a month the Big House charged for the 
use of the pen in their backyard. And so the two goats were tethered to the trunk 
of a drumstick tree which grew in front of his hut and from which occasionally 
Muni could shake down drumsticks. This morning he got six. He carried them in 
with a sense of triumph. Although no one could say precisely who owned the 



tree, it was his because he lived in its shadow. 

She said, “If you were content with the drumstick leaves alone, I could boil and 
salt some of you. ” 

“Oh, I am tired of eating those leaves. I have a craving to chew the drumstick 
out of sauce, I tell you. ” 

“ You have only four teeth in your jaw, but your craving is for big things. All 
right, get the stuff for the sauce, and I will prepare it for you. After all, next year 
you may not be alive to ask for anything. But, first get me all the stuff, including 
the measure of rice or millet, and I will satisfy your unholy craving. 

Our store is empty today. Dhall, chilli, curry leaves, mustard, coriander, 
gingelley oil, and one large potatoe. Go out and get all this. ” He repeated the 
list after her in order not to miss any item and walked off to the shop in the third 
street. 

He sat on an upturned packing case below the platform of the shop. The 
shopman paid no attention to him. Muni kept clearing his throat, coughing and 
sneezing, until the shopman could not stand it any more and demanded, “ What 
ails you? You will fly off the seat into the gutter if you Page 1 of 10 

Download free from www.fabmart.com 



sneeze so hard, young man. ” Muni laughed inordinately, in order to please the 
shopman, at the being called “young man.” The shopman softened and said, 
“You have enough of the imp inside to keep a second wife busy, but for the fact 
the old lady is still alive. ” Muni laughed appropriately again at this joke. It 
completely won the shopman over; he liked his sense of humour to be 
appreciated. 

Muni engaged his attention in local gossip for a few minutes, which always 
ended with a reference to the postman's wife, who had eloped to the city some 
months ago. 

The shopman felt most pleased to hear the worst of the postman, who had 


cheated him. Being an itinert postman, he returned home to Kritam only once in 
ten days and every time managed to slip away again without passing the shop in 
the third street. By thus humoring the shopman, Muni could always ask for one 
or two items of food, promising repayment later. Some days the shopman was in 
a good mood and gave in, and sometimes he would loose his temper and 
suddenly bark at Muni for daring to ask for credit. This was such a day, and 
Muni could not progress beyond two items listed as essential components. The 
shopman was also displaying a remarkable memory for old facts and figures and 
took out an oblong ledger to support his observations. Muni felt impelled to rise 
and flee. But his self-respect kept him in his seat and made him listen to the 
worst things about himself. 

The shopman concluded, “ If you could find five rupees and a quarter, you will 
have paid off an ancient debt and then could apply for admission to swarga. 

How much have you got now?” “I will pay you everything on the first of the next 
month. ” “As always, and whom do you expect to rob by then?” 

Muni felt caught and mumbled, “ My daughter has sent word that she will be 
sending me money. ” 

“Have you a daughter?” sneered the shopman. “And she is sending you money! 
For what purpose, may I know?” “Birthday, fiftieth birthday” , said Muni 
quietly. “Birthday! How old are you ? ” 

Muni repeated weakly, not being sure of it himself, “Fifty. ” He always 
calculated his age from the time of the great famine when he stood as high as the 
parapet around the village well, but who could calculate such things accurately 
nowadays with so many famines occurring? The shopman felt encouraged when 
other customers stood around to watch and comment. Muni thought helplessly, 
my poverty is exposed to everybody. But what can I do? “More likely you are 
seventy,” said the shopman. “You also forget that you mentioned a birthday five 
weeks ago when you wanted castor oil for your holy bath. ” 

“Bath! Who can dream of a bath when you have to scratch the tank-bed for a 
bowl of water? We would all be parched and dead but for the Big House, where 
they let us take a pot of water from their well. ” After saying this Muni 
unobtrusively rose and moved off. 


He told his wife, “ That scoundrel would not give me anything. So go out and 



sell the drumsticks for what they are worth. ” He flung himself down in a corner 
to recoup from the fatigue of his visit to the shop. His wife said, “ You are 
getting no sauce today, nor anything else. I can't find anything to give you to eat. 
Fast till the evening, it'll do you good. Take the goats and be gone now, ” she 
cried and added, “Don't come back before the sun is down. ” He knew that if he 
obeyed her she would somehow conjure up some food for him in the evening. 
Only he must be careful not to argue and irritate her. Her temper was 
undependable in the morning but improved by evening time. She was sure to go 
out and work grind corn in the Big House, sweep or scrub somewhere, and earn 
enough Page 2 of 10 

Download free from www.fabmart.com 



to buy foodstuff and keep a dinner ready for him in the evening. 

Unleashing the goats from the drumsticks tree. Muni started out, driving them 
ahead and uttering weird cries from time to time in order to urge them on. He 
passed through the village with his head bowed in thought. He did not want to 
look at anyone or be accosted. A couple of cronies lounging in the temple 
corridor hailed him, but he ignored their call. They had known him in the days of 
affluence when he lorded over a flock of fleecy sheep, not the miserable gawky 
goats that he had today. Of course he also used to have a few goats for those who 
fancied them, but real wealth lay in sheep; they bred fast and people came and 
bought the fleece in the shearing season; and then that famous butcher from the 
town came over on the weekly market days bringing him betel leaves, tobacco, 
and often enough some bhang, which they smoked in a hut in the coconut grove, 
undisturbed by wives and well-wishers. After a smoke one felt light and elated 
and inclined to forgive everyone including that brother-in-law of his who had 
once tried to set fire to his home. But all this seemed like the memories of a 
previous birth. Some pestilence afflicted his cattle (he could of course guess who 
had laid his animals under a curse), and even the friendly butcher would not 
touch one at half the price.. .And now here he was left with the two scraggy 
creatures. He wished someone would rid him of their company, too. The 
shopman had said that he was seventy. At seventy, one only waited to be 
summoned by God. When he was dead what would his wife do? They had lived 
in each other's company since they were children. He was told on their day of 
wedding that he was ten years old and she was eight. During the wedding 


ceremony they had to recite their respective ages and names. He had thrashed 
her only a few times in their career, and later she had the upper hand. 

Progeny, none. Perhaps a large progeny would have brought him the blessings of 
the gods. Fertility brought merit. People with fourteen sons were always so 
prosperous and at peace with the world themselves. He recollected the thrill he 
had felt when he mentioned a daughters, to that shopman; although it was not 
believed, what if he did not have a daughter? his cousin in the next village had 
many daughters, and any one of them was as good as his; he was fond of them 
all and would buy them sweets if he could afford it. Still, everyone in the village 
whispered behind their backs that Muni and his wife were a barren couple. He 
avoided looking at anyone; they all professed to be so high up, and everyone else 
in the village had more money than he. “ I am the poorest fellow in our caste 
and no wonder that they spurn me, but I won't look at them either, ” and so he 
passed on with his eyes downcast along the edge of the street, and people left 
him also very much alone, commenting only to the extent, “Ah, there he goes 
with his two goats; if he slits their throats, he may have more peace of mind. ” 
“What has he to worry about anyway? They live on nothing and have none to 
worry about. ” 

Thus people commented when he passed through the village. Only on the 
outskirts did he lift his head and look up. He urged and bullied the goats until 
they meandered along to the foot of the horse statue on the edge of the village. 

He sat on its pedestal for the rest of the day. The advantage of this was that he 
could watch the highway and see the lorries and buses pass through to the hills, 
and it gave him a sense of belonging to a larger world. The pedestal of the statue 
was broad enough for him to move around as the sun traveled up and westward; 
or he could also crouch under the belly of the horse, for shade. 

The horse was nearly life-size, moulded out of clay, baked, burnt, and brightly 
coloured, and reared its head proudly, prancing its forelegs in the air and 
flourishing its tail in a loop; beside the horse stood a warrior with scythe-like 
mustachios, bugling eyes, and aquiline nose. The old image-Page 3 of 10 

Download free from www.fabmart.com 



makers believed in indicating a man of strength by bulging out his eyes and 


sharpening his moustache tips, and also decorated the mud through the ravages 
of sun and wind and rain (When it came), but Muni would insist that he had 
known the beads to sparkle like the nine gems at one time in his life. The horse 
itself was said to have been as white as a dhobi-washed sheet, and had had on its 
back a cover of pure brocade of red and black lace, matching the multicolored 
sash around the waist of the warrior. But none in the village remembered the 
splendor as no one noticed its existence. Even Muni, who spent all his waking 
hours at its foot, never bothered to look up. It was untouched even by the young 
vandals of the village who gashed tree trunks with knives and tried to topple off 
milestones and inscribed lewd designs on all walls. This statue had been closer 
to the population of the village; but when the highway was laid through (or 
perhaps when the tank and wells dried up completely here) the village moved a 
couple of miles inland. 

Muni sat at the foot of the statue, watching his two goats graze in the arid soil 
among the cactus and lantana bushes. He looked at the sun; it was tilted 
westward no doubt, but it was not the time to go back home; if he went to early 
his wife would have no food for him. Also he must give her time to cool off her 
temper and feel sympathetic, and then she would scrounge and manage to get 
some food. He watched the mountain road for a time signal. When the green bus 
appeared around the bend he could leave, and his wife would feel pleased that he 
had let the goats feed long enough. 

He noticed now a new sort of vehicle coming down at full-speed. It looked like 
both a motorcar and a bus. He used to be intrigued by the novelty of such 
spectacles, but of late work was going on at the source of the river on the 
mountain and an assortment of people and traffic went past him, and he took it 
all casually and described to his wife, later in the day, everything he saw. Today, 
while he observed the yellow vehicle coming down, he was wondering how to 
describe it later to his wife, when it sputtered and stopped in front of him. A red¬ 
faced foreigner, who had been driving it, got down and went around it, stooping, 
looking, and poking under the vehicle; then he straightened himself up, looked at 
the dashboard, stared in Muni's direction, and approached him. “ Excuse me, is 
there a gas station nearby, or do I have to wait until another car comes” He 
suddenly looked up at the clay horse and cried, “Marvelous, ” without 
completing his sentence. Muni felt he should get up and run away, and cursed his 
age. He could not readily put his limbs into action; some years ago he could 
outrun a cheetah, as happened once when he went to the forest to cut fuel and it 
was then that two of his sheep were mauled a sign that bad times were coming. 



Though he tried, he could not easily extricate himself from his seat, and then 
there was also the problem of the goats. He could not leave them behind. 

The red-faced man wore khaki clothes- evidently a policeman or a solider. Muni 
said to himself. He will chase or shoot if I start running. Some dogs chase only 
those who run O Siva, protect me. I don't know why this man should be after me. 
Meanwhile the foreigner cried, “Marvelous!” again, nodding his head. He paced 
around the statute with his eyes fixed on it. Muni sat frozen for a while, and then 
fidgeted and tried to edge away. Now the other man suddenly pressed his palms 
together in a salute, smiled, and said, “Nameste! How do you do?” 

At which Muni spoke the only English expressions he had learnt, “Yes, no. ” 
Having exhausted his English vocabulary, he started in Tamil: “My name is 
Muni. These two goats are mine, and no one can gainsay it though our village is 
full of slanderers these days who will not hesitate to say that what Page 4 of 10 

Download free from www.fabmart.com 



belongs to a man doesn't belong to him. ” He rolled his eyes and shuddered at the 
thought of evil-minded and women peopling his village. 

The foreigner faithfully looked in the direction indicated by Muni's fingers gazed 
for a while at the two goats and the rocks, and with a puzzled expression took 
out his silver cigarette case and lit a cigarette. Suddenly remembering the 
courtesies of the season, he asked, “Doyou smoke?” Muni answered “Yes, no.” 
Whereupon the red-faced man took a cigarette and gave it to Muni, who received 
it with surprise, having had no offer of a smoke from anyone for years now. 
Those days when he smoked bhang were gone with his sheep and the large- 
hearted butcher. Nowadays he was not able to find even matches, let alone 
bhang. (His wife went across and borrowed a fire at dawn from a neighbor.) He 
had always wanted to smoke a cigarette; only once did the shopman give him 
one on credit, and he remembered how good it had tasted. The other flicked the 
light open and offered the light to Muni. Muni felt so confused about how to act 
that he blew on it and put it out. 

The other, puzzled but undaunted, flourished his lighter, presented it again, and 
lit Muni's cigarette. 


Muni drew a deep puff and started coughing; it was racking, no doubt, but 
extremely pleasant. 

When his cough subsided he wiped his eyes and took stock of the situation, 
understating that the other man was not an Inquisitor of any kind. Yet, in order to 
make sure, he remained wary. No need to run away from a man who gave him 
such a potent smoke. His head was reeling from one of those strong American 
cigarettes made with roasted tobacco. The man said, “I come from New York, ” 

took out a wallet from his hip pocket, and presented him his card. 

Muni shrank away from the card. Perhaps he was trying to present a warrant and 
arrest him. Beware of khaki, one part of his mind warned. Take all the cigarettes 
or bhang or whatever is offered, but don't get caught. Beware of khaki. He 
wished he weren't seventy as the shopman had said. At seventy one didn't run, 
but surrendered to whatever came. He could only ward off trouble by talk. 

So he went on, all in the chaste Tamil for which Kritam was famous. (Even the 
worse detractors could not deny that the famous poetess Avaiyar was born in this 
area, although no one could say whether it was in Kritam or Kuppam, the 
adjoining village.) Out of this heritage the Tamil language gushed through Muni 
in an unimpeded flow. He 


said “Before God, sir, Bhagwan, who sees everything, I tell you, sir, that we 
know nothing of the case. If the murder was committed, whoever did it will not 
escape. Bhagwan is all seeing. Don't ask me about it. I know nothing. ” A body 
has been found mutilated and thrown under a tamarind tree at the border 
between Kritam and Kuppam a few weeks before, giving rise to much gossip 
and speculation. Muni added an 


explanation “Anything is 

possible there. People over there will stop at nothing. ” The foreigner nodded his 
head and listened courteously though he understood nothing. 


“I am sure you know when this horse was made, ” said the red man and smiled 



ingratiatingly. 

Muni reacted to the relaxed atmosphere by smiling himself, and pleased, “ 

Please go away, sir, I know nothing. I promise we will hold him for you if we see 
any bad character around, and we will bury him up to his neck in a coconut pit if 
he tries to escape; but our village has always had a clean record. Must definitely 
be the other village. ” 

Now the red man implored, “Please, please, I will speak slowly, please try to 
understand me. Can't you understand even a simple word of English? Everyone 
in this country seems to know English. I Page 5 of 10 

Download free from www.fabmart.com 



have gotten along with English everywhere in this country, but you don't speak 
it. Have you any religious or spiritual scruples against English speech?” Muni 
made some indistinct sounds in his throat and shook his head. Encouraged, the 
other went on to explain at length, uttering each syllable with care and 
deliberation. Presently he sidled over and took a seat beside the old man, 
explaining, “ 

You see, last August, we probably had the hottest summer in history, and I was 
working in shirt-sleeves in my office on the fortieth floor of the Empire State 
Building. We had a power failure one day, you know, and there I was stuck for 
four hours, no elevator, no air conditioning. All the way in the train I kept 
thinking, and the minute I reached how in Connecticut, I told my wife, Ruth, 'We 
will visit India this winter, it's time to look at other civilizations.' Next day she 
called the travel agent first thing and told him to fix it, and so here I am. Ruth 
came with me but is staying back at Srinagar, and I am the one doing the rounds 
and joining her later. ” 

Muni looked reflective at the end of this long oration and said rather feebly, 

“Yes, no, ” as a concession to the other's language, and went on in Tamil, “When 
I was this high ” he indicated a foot high “I had heard my uncle say... ” 

No one can tell what he was planning to say, as the other interrupted him at this 
stage to ask, “Boy, what is the secret of your teeth? How old are you?” 


The old man forgot what he had started to say and remarked, “Sometimes we too 
lose our cattle. 

Jackals or cheetahs may sometimes carry them off, but sometimes it is just theft 
from over in the next village, and then we will know who has done it. Our priest 
at the temple can see in the camphor flame the face of the thief, and when he is 
caught.... ” He gestured with his hands a perfect mincing of meat. 

The American watched his hands intently and said, “I know what you mean. 
Chop something? 

Maybe I am holding you up and you want to chop wood? Where is your axe? 
Hand it to me and show me what to chop. I do enjoy it, you know, just a hobby. 
We get a lot of driftwood along the backwater near my house, and on Sundays I 
do nothing but chop wood for the fireplace, although it may take all the sections 
of the Sunday New York Times to get a fire started. ” And he smiled at this 
reference. 

Muni felt totally confused but decided the best thing would be to make an 
attempt to get away from this place. He tried to edge out, saying, “Must go 
home, ” and turned to go. The other seized his shoulder and said desperately, “Is 
there no one, absolutely no one here, to translate for me?” He looked up and 
down the road, which was deserted in this hot afternoon; a sudden gust of wind 
churned up the dust and dead leaves on the roadside into a ghostly column and 
propelled it towards the mountain road. The stranger almost pinioned Muni's 
back to the statue and asked, “Isn't this statue yours? Why don't you sell it to 
me?” The old man now understood the reference to the horse, thought for a 
second, and said in his own language, “I was an urchin this high when I heard 
my grandfather explain this horse and warrior, and my grandfather himself was 
this high when he heard his grandfather, whose grandfather... ” The other man 
interrupted him. “ I don't want to seem to have stopped here for nothing. I will 
offer you a good price for this,” he said, indicating the horse. He had concluded 
without the least doubt that Muni owned this mud horse. Perhaps he guessed by 
the way he sat on his pedestal, like other souvenir sellers in this country 
presiding over their wares. 

Muni followed the man's eyes, and pointing fingers and dimly understood the 
subject matter and, feeling relieved that the theme of the mutilated body had 
been abandoned at least for the time Page 6 of 10 



Download free from www.fabmart.com 



being, said again, enthusiastically, “I was this high when my grandfather told me 
about this horse and the warrior, and my grandfather was this high when he 
himself... ” and he was getting into a deeper bog of reminiscence each time he 
tried to indicate the antiquity of the statue. 

The Tamil that Muni spoke was stimulating even as pure sound, and the 
foreigner listened with fascination. “ I wish I had my tape-recorder here, ” he 
said, assuming the pleasantest expression. “ 

Your language sounds wonderful. I get a kick out of every word you utter. 


here ” he indicated his ears- 

“butyou don't have to waste your breath in sales talk. I appreciate the article. 
You don't have to explain its points. ” “I never went to a school, in those days 
only Brahmin went to schools, but we had to go out and work in the fields 
morning till night, sowing to harvest time... and when Pongal came and we cut 
the harvest, my father allowed me to go out and play with others at the tank, and 
so I don't know the Parangi language you speak, even little fellows in your 
country probably speak the Parangi language, but here only leaned men and 
officers know it. We had a postman in our village who could speak to you boldly 
in your language, but his wife ran away with someone and he does not speak 
with anyone at all nowadays. Who would if a wife did what she did? Women 
must be watched; otherwise they sell themselves and the home. ” And he laughed 
at his own quip. 

The foreigner laughed heartily, took out another cigarette, and offered it to Muni, 
who now smoked with ease, deciding to stay on if the fellow was going to be so 
good as to keep up his cigarette supply. 

The American now stood up on the pedestal in the attitude of a demonstrative 
lecturer and said, running his finger along some of the carved decorations around 
the horse's neck, speaking slowly and uttering his words syllable by syllable, “I 


could give a sales talk for this better that anyone else... 

This is a marvelous combination of yellow and indigo, though faded now... How 
do you people of this country achieve these flaming colors?” 

Muni, now assured that the subject was still the horse and not the dead body, 
said, “This is our guardian, it means death to our adversaries. At the end of Kali 
Yuga, this world and all other worlds will be destroyed, and the Redeemer will 
come in the shape of a horse called Kalki, this horse will come to life and gallop 
and trample down all bad men. ” As he spoke of bad men the figures of his 
shopman and his brother-in-law assumed concrete forms in his mind, and he 
revelled for a moment in the predicament of the fellow under the horse's hoof; 
served him right for trying to set fire to his home. 

While he was brooding on this pleasant vision, the foreigner utilized the pause to 
say, “ I assure you that this will have the best home in the U.S.A. I'll push away 
the bookcase, you know I love books and am a member of five book clubs, and 
the choice and bonus volumes mount up to a pile really in our living room, as 
high as this horse itself. But they'll have to go. Ruth may disapprove, but I will 
convince her. The TV may have to be shifted, too. We can't have everything in the 
living room. Ruth will probably say what about when we have a party? Tm going 
to keep him right in the middle of the room. 

I don't see how that can interfere with the party we'll stand around him and have 
our drinks. ” 

Muni continued his description of the end of the world. “Our pundit discoursed 
at the temple once how the oceans are going to close over the earth in a huge 
wave and carry on its back only the good people and kick into the floods the evil 
ones plenty of them about “ he said reflectively. “Do you know when it is going 
to happen?” he asked. 

Page 7 of 10 

Download free from www.fabmart.com 



The foreigner now understood by the tone of the other that a question was being 


asked and said, 


“How am I transporting it? I can push the seat back and make room in the rear. 
That van can take an elephant - 

” waving precisely at the back of the seat. 

Muni was still hovering on visions of avatars and said again, “I never missed our 
pundit's discourses at the temple in those days during every bright half of the 
month, although he'd go on all night, and he told that Vishnu is the highest god. 
Whenever evil men trouble us, he comes down to save us. He has come many 
times. The first time he incarnated as a great fish, and lifted the scriptures on his 
back when the flood and sea waves.... ” “I am not a millionaire, but a modest 
businessman. My trade is coffee. ” 

Amidst all this wilderness of obscure sound Muni caught the word “ coffee” and 
said , “If you want to drink 'kapi,' drive further up, in the next town, they have 
Friday market and there they open 'kapi-otels'- 

so I learn from passer-by. Don't think I wander about. I go nowhere and look for 
nothing. ” His thoughts went back to the avatars. “ The first avatar was in the 
shape of a little fish in a bowl of water, but every hour it grew bigger and bigger 
and became in the end a huge whale the holy books were supported, saved, and 
carried. ” Once he had launched on the first avatar, it was inevitable that he 
should go on to the next, a wild boar on whose tusk the earth was lifted when a 
vicious conqueror of the earth carried it off and hid it at the bottom of the sea. 
After describing this avatar Muni concluded , “ God will always save us 
whenever we are troubled by evil begins. When we were young we staged at full 
moon the story of the avatars. That's how I know the stories; we played them all 
night until the sun rose, and sometimes the European collector would come to 
watch, bringing his own chair. I had a good voice and so they always taught me 
songs and gave me the women's roles. I was always Goddess Lakshmi, and they 
dressed me in a brocade sari, loaned form the Big House... ” 

The foreigner said, “ I repeat I am not a millionaire. Ours is a modest business; 
after all, we can't afford to buy more than sixty minutes of TV times in a month, 
which works out to two minutes a day, that's all, although in the course of time 
we'll maybe sponsor a one-hour show regularly if our sales graph continues to 

go 



Muni 


was intoxicated by the memory of his theatrical days and was about to explain 
how he had painted his face and worn a wig and diamond earring when the 
visitor, feeling that he had spent too much time already, said , “Tell me, will you 
accept a hundred rupees or not for the horse? I'd love to take the whiskered 
soldier also but no space for him this year. I'll have to cancel my air ticket and 
take a boat home, I suppose. Ruth can go by air if she likes, but I will go with the 
horse and keep him in my cabin all the way if necessary. ” And he smiled at the 
picture of himself voyaging across the seas hugging this horse. He added, “ I 
will have to pad it with straw so that it doesn't break... ” “When we played 
Ramayana, they dressed me as Sita, ” added Muni. “A teacher came and taught 
us the songs for the drama and we gave him fifty rupees. He incarnated himself 
as Rama, and he alone could destroy Ravana, the demon with ten heads who 
shook all the worlds; do you know the story of Ramayana?” 

“I have a station wagon as you see. I can push the seat back and take the horse 
in if you will lend me a hand with it. ” “Do you know Mahabharata? Krishna 
was the eight avatar of Vishnu, incarnated to help the Five Brothers regain their 
kingdom. When Krishna was a baby he danced on the thousand-hooded giant 
serpent and trampled it to death; and then he suckled the breasts of the 
demoness and left them flat as a disc, though when she came to him her bosoms 
were large, like mounds of earth on Page 8 of 10 

Download free from www.fabmart.com 



the banks of a dug-up canal. ” He indicated two mounds with his hands. 

The stranger was completely mystified by the gesture. For the first time he said, 
“I really wonder what are you saying because your answer is crucial. We have 
come to the point when we should be ready to talk business. ” 
